Portenta H7 tutorial: Secure Boot [PC-894] (#129)
arduino/docs-content: content/hardware/04.pro/boards/portenta-h7/tutorials/secure-boot/secure-boot.md

---

> title: 'Secure Boot'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'Secure Boot on Portenta H7'
```

> description: 'Learn how to use secure boot on the Arduino Portenta H7.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: 'Learn how to use secure boot on the Arduino Portenta H7.'
```

Author: @ubidefeo I don't see any change

tags: 
  - Secure Boot
author: 'Umberto Baldi'
hardware:
  - hardware/04.pro/boards/portenta-h7

software:
  - ide-v1
  - ide-v2
  - cli
---

## Introduction

> This short tutorial will teach how to enable the secure boot on the Portenta H7, how to generate custom security keys, and how you can use them with MCUBoot bootloader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This short tutorial will guide the user through enabling the secure boot on the Portenta H7, generating custom security keys, and using them with the MCUBoot bootloader.
```

> ## Hardware & Software Required

Author: Actually this comes from [the template](https://github.com/umbynos/docs-content/blob/e543e775189c398ebdb0a4cdf3cc244c18016d3e/contribution-templates/how-to-template/how-to-template.md#hardware--software-required)

If no operation is performed the default security keys are used.
They are embedded in the example sketch `STM32H747_updateBootloader` that can be found in  **Files > Examples > STM32H747_System > STM32H747_updateBootloader**. A private 256bit [ECDSA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliptic_Curve_Digital_Signature_Algorithm) key is used for the encryption (`ecdsa-p256-encrypt-key.h`), while a public key is used for the signing (`ecdsa-p256-signing-key.h`). These two keys are the ones the bootloader uses to verify if a sketch is valid or not, before starting it. The default private keys used after compiling a sketch to sign and encrypt it, are located in `Arduino15/packages/arduino/hardware/mbed_portenta/<version>/libraries/MCUboot/default_keys/`.

### 1. Generate Custom Cecurity Keys
The default keys that comes with the mbed platform are obviously only intended for development purposes. In a production environment it's suggested to generate a new key pair (public and private key).
This can be done with [**imgtool**](https://github.com/arduino/imgtool-packing/releases/latest). You can download and install it directly from the release section.

> ***Pro tip: imgtool is already installed by the mbed platform and can be found in the `Arduino15/packages/arduino/tools/imgtool` directory.***

Reviewer 2: ### Windows

```text
%LOCALAPPDATA%\Arduino15\packages\arduino\tools\imgtool
```

(e.g., `C:\Users\<username>\AppData\Local\Arduino15\packages\arduino\tools\imgtool`)

### Linux

```text
~/.arduino15/packages/arduino/tools/imgtool
```

### macOS

```text
~/Library/Arduino15/packages/arduino/tools/imgtool
```

---
title: 'Secure Boot on Portenta H7'
description: 'Learn how to use secure boot on the Arduino Portenta H7.'
tags: 
  - Secure Boot
author: 'Umberto Baldi'
hardware:
  - hardware/04.pro/boards/portenta-h7

software:
  - ide-v1
  - ide-v2
  - cli
---
## Introduction
This short tutorial will guide the user through enabling the secure boot on the Portenta H7, generating custom security keys, and using them with the MCUboot bootloader.

## Hardware & Software Required
-   [Portenta H7](https://store.arduino.cc/portenta-h7)
-   Arduino IDE 1.8.19+  or Arduino IDE 2.0.0-rc5+ (https://www.arduino.cc/en/software)

> -   [Arduino Mbed OS Portenta Boards](https://github.com/arduino/ArduinoCore-mbed) version 3.0.0+

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-   [Arduino Core for mbed enabled devices](https://github.com/arduino/ArduinoCore-mbed) version 3.0.0+
```

-   [imgtool](https://github.com/arduino/imgtool-packing/releases/latest) (optional)

## Instructions

### Flashing the Latest Bootloader
In order to have secure boot enabled you must update the bootloader on your Portenta H7 and use [MCUboot](https://www.mcuboot.com/). You can find more info on how to perform the update in [this other tutorial](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-h7/updating-the-bootloader).

### Use Default Security Keys
Once The bootloader has been updated to MCUboot, it's possible to use [secure boot](https://www.keyfactor.com/blog/what-is-secure-boot-its-where-iot-security-starts/) to have an additional layer of security. From that point on it is required to upload a compiled sketch with the Custom Board Option **"Security settings"** set to **"Signature + Encryption"** (the option can be found under **Tools > Security settings** in the IDE when selecting Portenta H7 as board, or you can use `--board-options security=sien` if using the Arduino CLI). Failing to provide such option will cause the bootloader not to run the compiled sketch because it is not trusted.

> If no operation is performed the default security keys are used.

Author: I mean: "if the keys are not overridden, the default ones are used". Should I rephrase it?

> These keys are embedded in the example sketch `STM32H747_updateBootloader` which can be found in  **Files > Examples > STM32H747_System > STM32H747_updateBootloader**. A private 256bit [ECDSA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliptic_Curve_Digital_Signature_Algorithm) key is used for the encryption (`ecdsa-p256-encrypt-key.h`), while a public key is used for the signing (`ecdsa-p256-signing-key.h`). These two keys are the ones the bootloader uses to verify if a sketch is valid or not, before starting it for the first time. The default private keys used after compiling a sketch to sign and encrypt it are located in `Arduino15/packages/arduino/hardware/mbed_portenta/<version>/libraries/MCUboot/default_keys/`.

Reviewer 3: How can a public key be used for signing? Shouldn't a private key be used for signing and the public one for verifying the signature?

Author: https://github.com/arduino/ArduinoCore-mbed/pull/447#issue-1195653112 CC @pennam

Reviewer 4: since we are referring to the keys included in the bootloader maybe we can rewrite the paragraph like this:

Two keys are embedded in the example sketch `STM32H747_updateBootloader` which can be found in  **Files > Examples > STM32H747_System > STM32H747_updateBootloader** and used by the bootloader.
A private 256bit [ECDSA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliptic_Curve_Digital_Signature_Algorithm) key is used to extract the encryption key and decrypt the binary update (`ecdsa-p256-encrypt-key.h`),  while the public key is used for image verification (`ecdsa-p256-signing-key.h`).

As counterpart, when building the image update, imgtool uses this private [key](https://github.com/arduino/ArduinoCore-mbed/pull/447/files#diff-f43e4850d60c61854678f6f80c6ddc4b59e3e68ca7e71b02e5ed15288c9aadb4) to sign the image and this public [key](https://github.com/arduino/ArduinoCore-mbed/pull/447/files#diff-95bb7b27de14276896a2bec099dc5a498d5332616458c04263efc8d24810e6a6) for image encryption with elliptic curve integrated encryption scheme.

> ### 1. Generate Custom Cecurity Keys

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### 1. Generate Custom Security Keys
```

The default keys provided with the mbed platform are obviously only intended for development purposes. In a production environment it is strongly recommended to generate a new key pair (public and private key).

> This can be done with [**imgtool**](https://github.com/arduino/imgtool-packing/releases/latest). You can download and install it directly from the release section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This can be done with **imgtool**. You can download and install it directly from the [release section](https://github.com/arduino/imgtool-packing/releases/latest).
```

***`imgtool` is already installed by the mbed platform and can be found in the `%LOCALAPPDATA%\Arduino15\packages\arduino\tools\imgtool` directory on Windows, in `~/.arduino15/packages/arduino/tools/imgtool` on Linux and in `~/Library/Arduino15/packages/arduino/tools/imgtool` on macOS.***

To generate the new keys you can use this command line:
```
imgtool keygen --key my-sign-keyfile.pem -t ecdsa-p256
imgtool keygen --key my-encrypt-keyfile.pem -t ecdsa-p256
```
This command line will generate two private PEM encoded security keys and save them in the current directory with `my-sign-keyfile.pem` and `my-encrypt-keyfile.pem` names. The algorithm used to generate the keys is ECDSA 256bit.

> Remember to **save the keys on a secure location** and not to lose them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Remember to **save the keys and keep them in a secure location** and not to lose them.
```

```
imgtool getpriv -k my-encrypt-keyfile.pem > ecsda-p256-encrypt-key.h 
imgtool getpub -k my-sign-keyfile.pem > ecsda-p256-signing-key.h
```

Now you have to replace the keys inside the Sketch to update the bootloader(**STM32H747_updateBootloader**).
To do so just save the sketch to another location and replace the `ecsda-p256-encrypt-key.h` and `ecsda-p256-signing-key.h` files with the newly generated ones and then [update the bootloader](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-h7/updating-the-bootloader) again.

***NOTE: In case the keys are compromised, this process can be performed again with a new set of keys, but any firmware signed with the previous pair will no longer work.***

### 3. Use the Custom Keys when Compiling
Since the default keys have been changed in favour of custom generated ones, the new ones have to be used when compiling and uploading a sketch, because the compiled sketch is signed and encrypted using such keys.

> To override the security keys used during the compile you have to use the Arduino CLI and specify the keys with:

Reviewer: @sebromero 
in the future we plan on allowing users to select keys and generate new ones, but this needs some UX research as well as a real need for it

```
arduino-cli compile -b arduino:mbed_portenta:envie_m7 --board-options security=sien --keys-keychain <path-to-your-keys> --sign-key ecsdsa-p256-signing-key.pem --encrypt-key ecsdsa-p256-encrypt-key.pem /home/user/Arduino/MySketch
```

## Learn More

> If you want to implement secure boot for your platform [this](https://arduino.github.io/arduino-cli/latest/guides/secure-boot/) should be helpful.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to implement secure boot for your platform have a look at [this article] (https://arduino.github.io/arduino-cli/latest/guides/secure-boot/).
```

Reviewer 3: You platform meaning...? Your board? Your core?

Author: https://arduino.github.io/arduino-cli/0.21/platform-specification/

---
title: 'Secure Boot on Portenta H7'
description: 'Learn how to use secure boot on the Arduino Portenta H7.'
tags: 
  - Secure Boot
author: 'Umberto Baldi'
hardware:
  - hardware/04.pro/boards/portenta-h7

software:
  - ide-v1
  - ide-v2
  - cli
---

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

## Introduction
This short tutorial will guide the user through enabling the secure boot on the Portenta H7, generating custom security keys, and using them with the MCUboot bootloader.

## Hardware & Software Required
-   [Portenta H7](https://store.arduino.cc/portenta-h7)
-   Arduino IDE 1.8.19+  or Arduino IDE 2.0.0-rc5+ (https://www.arduino.cc/en/software)
-   [Arduino Mbed OS Portenta Boards](https://github.com/arduino/ArduinoCore-mbed) version 3.0.0+
-   [imgtool](https://github.com/arduino/imgtool-packing/releases/latest) (optional)

## Instructions

### Flashing the Latest Bootloader

> In order to have secure boot enabled you must update the bootloader on your Portenta H7 and use [MCUboot](https://www.mcuboot.com/). You can find more info on how to perform the update in [this other tutorial](../por-ard-bl/content.md).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In order to have secure boot enabled you must update the bootloader on your Portenta H7 and use [MCUboot](https://www.mcuboot.com/). You can find more info on how to perform the update in [this other tutorial](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-h7/updating-the-bootloader).
```

Reviewer 3: Better to use the doc root `path /tutorials/portenta-h7/updating-the-bootloaderà should we ever want to rename the subdomain

If no operation is performed the default security keys are used.
These keys are embedded in the example sketch `STM32H747_updateBootloader` which can be found in  **Files > Examples > STM32H747_System > STM32H747_updateBootloader**. A private 256bit [ECDSA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliptic_Curve_Digital_Signature_Algorithm) key is used for the encryption (`ecdsa-p256-encrypt-key.h`), while a public key is used for the signing (`ecdsa-p256-signing-key.h`). These two keys are the ones the bootloader uses to verify if a sketch is valid or not, before starting it for the first time. The default private keys used after compiling a sketch to sign and encrypt it are located in `Arduino15/packages/arduino/hardware/mbed_portenta/<version>/libraries/MCUboot/default_keys/`.

### 1. Generate Custom Cecurity Keys

> The default keys provided with the mbed platform are obviously only intended for development purposes. In a production environment it is advised to generate a new key pair (public and private key).

Reviewer 4: I would say that is mandatory to generate a new key pair or at least strongly recommended

Author: done

This can be done with [**imgtool**](https://github.com/arduino/imgtool-packing/releases/latest). You can download and install it directly from the release section.

> ***Pro tip: imgtool is already installed by the mbed platform and can be found in the `%LOCALAPPDATA%\Arduino15\packages\arduino\tools\imgtool` directory on Windows, in `~/.arduino15/packages/arduino/tools/imgtool` on Linux and in `~/Library/Arduino15/packages/arduino/tools/imgtool` on macOS.***

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
***`imgtool` is already installed by the mbed platform and can be found in the `%LOCALAPPDATA%\Arduino15\packages\arduino\tools\imgtool` directory on Windows, in `~/.arduino15/packages/arduino/tools/imgtool` on Linux and in `~/Library/Arduino15/packages/arduino/tools/imgtool` on macOS.***
```

To generate the new keys you can use this command line:
```
imgtool keygen --key my-sign-keyfile.pem -t ecdsa-p256
imgtool keygen --key my-encrypt-keyfile.pem -t ecdsa-p256
```

> This command line will generate two private PEM encoded security keys and save them in the current directory with `my-sign-keyfile.pem`and `my-encrypt-keyfile.pem` names. The algorithm used to generate the keys is ECDSA 256bit.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This command line will generate two private PEM encoded security keys and save them in the current directory with `my-sign-keyfile.pem` and `my-encrypt-keyfile.pem` names. The algorithm used to generate the keys is ECDSA 256bit.
```

> Remember to **save the keys to a secure location** and not to lose them.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Remember to **save the keys on a secure location** and not to lose them.
```

Reviewer 3: "save the keys in a secure place"

### 2. Upload the Custom Keys to the Board
Once the keys have been generated they have to be uploaded on the Portenta. This procedure has to be done only once, because it's persistent. To extract the public\private key and encode it in to a "C" byte array inside a `.h` header file you can use:
```
imgtool getpriv -k my-encrypt-keyfile.pem > ecsda-p256-encrypt-key.h 
imgtool getpub -k my-sign-keyfile.pem > ecsda-p256-signing-key.h
```

Now you have to replace the keys inside the Sketch to update the bootloader(**STM32H747_updateBootloader**).

> To do so just save the sketch to another location and replace the `ecsda-p256-encrypt-key.h` and `ecsda-p256-signing-key.h` files with the newly generated ones and then [update the bootloader](../por-ard-bl/content.md) again.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To do so just save the sketch to another location and replace the `ecsda-p256-encrypt-key.h` and `ecsda-p256-signing-key.h` files with the newly generated ones and then [update the bootloader](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-h7/updating-the-bootloader) again.
```

-   [imgtool](https://github.com/arduino/imgtool-packing/releases/latest) (optional)

## Instructions

### Flashing the Latest Bootloader
In order to have secure boot enabled you must update the bootloader on your Portenta H7 and use [MCUboot](https://www.mcuboot.com/). You can find more info on how to perform the update in [this other tutorial](https://docs.arduino.cc/tutorials/portenta-h7/updating-the-bootloader).

### Use Default Security Keys
Once The bootloader has been updated to MCUboot, it's possible to use [secure boot](https://www.keyfactor.com/blog/what-is-secure-boot-its-where-iot-security-starts/) to have an additional layer of security. From that point on it is required to upload a compiled sketch with the Custom Board Option **"Security settings"** set to **"Signature + Encryption"** (the option can be found under **Tools > Security settings** in the IDE when selecting Portenta H7 as board, or you can use `--board-options security=sien` if using the Arduino CLI). Failing to provide such option will cause the bootloader not to run the compiled sketch because it is not trusted.

> If no operation is performed the default security keys are used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the security keys are not overridden, the default ones are used."
```
